README.asciidoc, before:

HA Web Konsole (Hawk)
=====================
See AUTHORS

image:https://travis-ci.org/ClusterLabs/hawk.svg?branch=master["Build Status", link="https://travis-ci.org/ClusterLabs/hawk"]
image:https://codeclimate.com/github/ClusterLabs/hawk/badges/gpa.svg["Code Climate", link="https://codeclimate.com/github/ClusterLabs/hawk"]
image:https://readthedocs.org/projects/hawk-guide/badge/?style=flat["Documentation", link="http://hawk-guide.readthedocs.org/"]

Hawk is a web interface for the Pacemaker High Availability stack. The
goal of the project is to create a complete interface to the HA
cluster, including the configuration, management and monitoring of
cluster resources.

http://hawk-ui.github.io[http://hawk-ui.github.io]

== Table of contents
* <<overview>>
* <<documentation>>
* <<screenshots>>
* <<features>>
* <<installation>>
* <<build-dependencies>>
* <<a-note-on-ssl-certificates>>
* <<hacking-hawk>>
* <<questions-feedback-etc>>

== Overview ==

Hawk runs on every node in the cluster, so that you can just point
your web browser at any node to access it. E.g.:

https://your-cluster-node:7630/

Hawk is always accessed via HTTPS, and requires users to log in prior
to providing access to the cluster. The same user privilege rules
apply as for Pacemaker itself: You need to log in as a user in the
+haclient+ group. The easiest thing to do is to assign a password to
the +hacluster+ user, and then to log in using that account. Note that
you will need to configure this user account on every node that you
will use Hawk on.

For more fine-grained control over access to the cluster, you can
create multiple user accounts and configure Access Control Lists (ACL)
for those users. These access control rules are available directly
from the Hawk user interface.

Once logged in, you will see a status view displaying the current
state of the cluster. All the configured cluster resources are shown
together with their status, as well as a general state of the cluster
and a list of recent cluster events (if any).

The navigation menu on the left hand side provides access to the
additional features of Hawk, such as the history explorer, the
multi-cluster dashboard and configuration management. On the top right
of the screen you can enable or disable the simulator, configure user
preferences and log out of the cluster.

Resource management operations (start, stop, online, standby, etc.)
can be performed using the menu of operations next to the resource in
the status view.

== Documentation

* http://hawk-ui.github.io[Website]
* http://hawk-guide.readthedocs.org/en/latest/[The Hawk Guide]
* http://www.suse.com/documentation/sle_ha/book_sleha/?page=/documentation/sle_ha/book_sleha/data/cha_ha_configuration_hawk.html[SUSE Linux Enterprise High Availability Extension Documentation]

== Screenshots

image:screens/status.png["Status"]
image:screens/wizard.png["Wizard"]

== Features

Note that this list of features is not complete, and is intended only
as a rough guide to the Hawk user interface.

=== Resource Management

From the status view of Hawk, you can control the state of individual
resources or resource groups, start / stop / promote / demote. You can
also migrate resources to and away from specific nodes, clean up
resources after failure and show a list of recent events for the
resource.

On the status page you can also manage nodes including setting node
attributes and displaying recent events related to the specific node.

Additionally, if there are any tickets configured (requires the use of
geo clustering via booth footnote:[https://github.com/ClusterLabs/booth/]),
these are also displayed in the status view  and can be managed in a
similar fashion to resources.

=== Multi-cluster Dashboard

The Dashboard can be used to monitor the local cluster, displaying a
blinkenlights-style overview of all resources as well as any recent
failures that may have occurred. It is also possible to configure
access to remote clusters, so that multiple clusters can be monitored
from a single interface. This can be useful as a HUD in an operations
center, or when using geo clustering.

Hawk can also run in an *offline mode*, where you run Hawk on a
non-cluster machine which monitors one or more remote clusters.

=== History Explorer

The history explorer is a tool for collecting and downloading cluster
reports, which include logs and other information for a certain
timeframe. The history explorer is also useful for analysing such
cluster reports. You can either upload a previously generated cluster
report for analysis, or generate one on the fly.

Once uploaded, you can scroll through all of the cluster events that
took place in the time frame covered by the report. For each event,
you can see the current cluster configuration, logs from all cluster
nodes and a transition graph showing exactly what happened and why.

=== Configuration

Hawk makes it easy to configure both resources, groups of resources,
constraints and tags. You can also configure resource templates to be
reused later, and cloned resources that are active on multiple nodes
at once.

=== Wizards

Cluster wizards are useful for creating more complicated
configurations in a single process. The wizards vary in complexity
from simply configuring a single virtual IP address to configuring
multiple resources together with constraints, in multiple steps and
including package installation, configuration and setup.

=== View Configuration and Graph

From the web interface you can view the current cluster configuration
in the `crm` shell syntax or as XML. You can also generate a graph
view of the resources and constraints configured in the cluster.

=== Command Log

To make the transition between using the web interface and the command
line interface easier, Hawk provides a command log showing a list of
recent commands executed by the web interface. A user who is learning
to configure a Pacemaker cluster can start by using the web interface,
and learn how to use the command line in the process.

=== Access Control Lists

Pacemaker supports fine-grained access control to the configuration
based on user roles. These roles can be viewed and configured directly
from the web interface. Using the ACL rules, you can for example
create unprivileged user accounts that are able to log in and view the
state of the cluster, but cannot edit resources.

=== Simulator

Hawk features a cluster simulation mode. Once enabled, any changes to
the cluster are not applied directly. Instead, events such as resource
failure or node failure can be simulated, and the user can see what
the resulting cluster response would be. This can be very useful when
configuring constraints, to ensure that the rules work as intended.

== Installation ==

Hawk is a Ruby on Rails app which runs using the Puma web server
(http://puma.io/).

There is a special build mode which vendors all the rubygems used by
Hawk, to create a package which bundles all of the gems. See the
included RPM spec file in +rpm/hawk.spec+ for details.

For details on the rubygems used by hawk, see the gemfile in
+hawk/Gemfile+.

== Build Dependencies ==

The exact versions specified here may not be accurate. Also, note that
Hawk also requires the rubygems listed in +hawk/Gemfile+.

* ruby version 1.9.3 or higher
* libpacemaker-devel
* pacemaker-libs-devel
* glib2-devel
* libxml2-devel >= 2.6.21
* libxslt-devel
* openssl-devel
* pam-devel


=== Dependencies ===

The exact versions specified here may not be accurate. Also, note that
Hawk also requires the rubygems listed in +hawk/Gemfile+.

* crmsh
* graphviz
* graphviz-gd
* dejavu
* pacemaker >= 1.1.8
* iproute2


Some dependencies may differ depending on the distribution:

* rubypick (Fedora)

=== Installing The Easy Way ===

Hawk is included with SLE HA 11 SP1, openSUSE 11.4, and later
SUSE releases. Recent versions are also available
http://software.opensuse.org/download?project=network:ha-clustering:Factory&package=hawk2[for download from OBS].

Just install the RPM, then run:

--------------------------------------
# systemctl enable hawk
# systemctl start hawk
--------------------------------------

=== Installing The Other Easy Way ===

If you have a SUSE- or Fedora-based system, you can build
an RPM easily from the source tree.  Just clone this git repo,
and run "make rpm".

Once built, install the RPM on your cluster nodes and:

--------------------------------------
# systemctl enable hawk
# systemctl start hawk
--------------------------------------

=== Installing The Hard Way ===

If the above RPM build doesn't work for you, you can build and install
straight from the source tree, but _read the Makefile first_ to ensure
you'll be happy with the outcome!

--------------------------------------
# make
# sudo make install
--------------------------------------

The above will install in +/srv/www/hawk+. To install somewhere else
(e.g.: +/var/www/hawk+) and/or to use a Red Hat-style init script,
try:

--------------------------------------
# make WWW_BASE=/var/www INIT_STYLE=redhat
--------------------------------------
--------------------------------------
# sudo make WWW_BASE=/var/www INIT_STYLE=redhat install
--------------------------------------

=== Installing The Other Hard Way ===

Grab the SRPM from OBS, for example try the one in
http://download.opensuse.org/repositories/network:/ha-clustering:/Stable/Fedora_19/src/
if you're using Fedora 19, and build that.


== A Note on SSL Certificates ==

The Hawk init script will automatically generate a self-signed SSL
certificate, in +/etc/hawk/hawk.pem+.  If you want
to use your own certificate, replace +hawk.key+ and +hawk.pem+ with
your certificate.


== Hacking Hawk ==

To hack on Hawk we recommend to use the vagrant setup. There is a
Vagrantfile attached, which creates a three-node cluster with a basic
configuration suitable for development and testing.

To be prepared for getting our vagrant setup running you need to follow
some steps.

* Install the vagrant package from http://www.vagrantup.com/downloads.html,
  the minimal version requirement is +>= 1.7.0+ in order to work properly
  with openSUSE/SLED workstation setups.

* Install +virtualbox+, we assume you know how to do that on your OS. If
  you prefer +libvirt+ you can use that as well.

Out of the box, +vagrant+ is configured to synchronize the working
folder to +/vagrant+ in the virtual machines using NFS. For this to
work properly, the +vagrant-bindfs+ plugin is necessary.

Install it using the following command:

--------------------------------------
  # vagrant plugin install vagrant-bindfs
--------------------------------------

* If you plan to use +libvirt+ as provider make sure you have the 
  libvirt-plugin installed:

--------------------------------------
  # vagrant plugin install vagrant-libvirt
--------------------------------------

* You need to fetch the git submodules to finish your development setup:

--------------------------------------
  # git submodule update --init --recursive
--------------------------------------

This is all you need to prepare initally to set up the vagrant environment,
now you can simply start the virtual machine with +vagrant up+ and start
an ssh session with +vagrant ssh webui+ based on +virtualbox+. To start the
virtual machines on +libvirt+ you have to append +--provider=libvirt+ to the
above commands, e.g. +vagrant up --provider=libvirt+. If you want to access
the source within the virtual machine you have to switch to the +/vagrant+
directory.

You can access the Hawk web interface based on the git source through
+http://localhost:3000+ now. If you want to access the version installed
through packages you can reach it through +https://localhost:7630+.

Installed on the development VM is a script called +hawk+, which can be used
to control the development instance of hawk.

--------------------------------------
$ vagrant ssh webui
vagrant@webui:~> hawk status
vagrant@webui:~> hawk log
vagrant@webui:~> hawk start
vagrant@webui:~> hawk stop
vagrant@webui:~> hawk restart
--------------------------------------

Because Hawk is multi-threaded, the Rails asset auto-loading doesn't work properly.
Unfortunately this means that you need to run +hawk restart+ after changing
most files. The exception is the HAML view files which update automatically.

If you need to change something on +hawk_chkpwd+, +hawk_invoke+ or
+hawk_monitor+ you need to provision the machine again with the command
+vagrant provision+ to get this scripts compiled and copied to the correct
places, setuid-root and group to haclient in /usr/bin again. You should
end up with something like:

--------------------------------------
# ls /usr/sbin/hawk_* -l+ +
-rwsr-x--- 1 root haclient 9884 2011-04-14 22:56 /usr/sbin/hawk_chkpwd+
-rwsr-x--- 1 root haclient 9928 2011-04-14 22:56 /usr/sbin/hawk_invoke+
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root     9992 2011-04-14 22:56 /usr/sbin/hawk_monitor+
--------------------------------------

+hawk_chkpwd+ is almost identical to +unix2_chkpwd+, except it restricts
acccess to users in the +haclient+ group, and doesn't inject any delay
when invoked by the +hacluster+ user (which is the user the Hawk web
server instance runs as).

+hawk_invoke+ allows the +hacluster+ user to run a small assortment
of Pacemaker CLI tools as another user in order to support Pacemaker's
ACL feature.  It is used by Hawk when performing various management
tasks.

+hawk_monitor+ is not installed setuid-root.  It exists to be polled
by the web browser, to facilitate near-realtime updates of the cluster
status display.  It is not used when running Hawk via WEBrick.


If the development hawk instance isn't running, it can be started using this command:

--------------------------------------
webui:/vagrant/hawk # sudo -u vagrant bin/rails s
--------------------------------------


== Questions, Feedback, etc. ==

Hawk is developed at github, please file any issues or submit patches
via the github interface at https://github.com/ClusterLabs/hawk/issues .

Please direct comments, feedback, questions etc. to the Pacemaker
mailing list at http://clusterlabs.org/mailman/listinfo/users .

Commit message:

Doc: organize the 'Hacking hawk' section

README.asciidoc, after:

HA Web Konsole (Hawk)
=====================
See AUTHORS

image:https://travis-ci.org/ClusterLabs/hawk.svg?branch=master["Build Status", link="https://travis-ci.org/ClusterLabs/hawk"]
image:https://codeclimate.com/github/ClusterLabs/hawk/badges/gpa.svg["Code Climate", link="https://codeclimate.com/github/ClusterLabs/hawk"]
image:https://readthedocs.org/projects/hawk-guide/badge/?style=flat["Documentation", link="http://hawk-guide.readthedocs.org/"]

Hawk is a web interface for the Pacemaker High Availability stack. The
goal of the project is to create a complete interface to the HA
cluster, including the configuration, management and monitoring of
cluster resources.

http://hawk-ui.github.io[http://hawk-ui.github.io]

== Table of contents
* <<overview>>
* <<documentation>>
* <<screenshots>>
* <<features>>
* <<installation>>
* <<build-dependencies>>
* <<a-note-on-ssl-certificates>>
* <<hacking-hawk>>
* <<questions-feedback-etc>>

== Overview ==

Hawk runs on every node in the cluster, so that you can just point
your web browser at any node to access it. E.g.:

https://your-cluster-node:7630/

Hawk is always accessed via HTTPS, and requires users to log in prior
to providing access to the cluster. The same user privilege rules
apply as for Pacemaker itself: You need to log in as a user in the
+haclient+ group. The easiest thing to do is to assign a password to
the +hacluster+ user, and then to log in using that account. Note that
you will need to configure this user account on every node that you
will use Hawk on.

For more fine-grained control over access to the cluster, you can
create multiple user accounts and configure Access Control Lists (ACL)
for those users. These access control rules are available directly
from the Hawk user interface.

Once logged in, you will see a status view displaying the current
state of the cluster. All the configured cluster resources are shown
together with their status, as well as a general state of the cluster
and a list of recent cluster events (if any).

The navigation menu on the left hand side provides access to the
additional features of Hawk, such as the history explorer, the
multi-cluster dashboard and configuration management. On the top right
of the screen you can enable or disable the simulator, configure user
preferences and log out of the cluster.

Resource management operations (start, stop, online, standby, etc.)
can be performed using the menu of operations next to the resource in
the status view.

== Documentation

* http://hawk-ui.github.io[Website]
* http://hawk-guide.readthedocs.org/en/latest/[The Hawk Guide]
* http://www.suse.com/documentation/sle_ha/book_sleha/?page=/documentation/sle_ha/book_sleha/data/cha_ha_configuration_hawk.html[SUSE Linux Enterprise High Availability Extension Documentation]

== Screenshots

image:screens/status.png["Status"]
image:screens/wizard.png["Wizard"]

== Features

Note that this list of features is not complete, and is intended only
as a rough guide to the Hawk user interface.

=== Resource Management

From the status view of Hawk, you can control the state of individual
resources or resource groups, start / stop / promote / demote. You can
also migrate resources to and away from specific nodes, clean up
resources after failure and show a list of recent events for the
resource.

On the status page you can also manage nodes including setting node
attributes and displaying recent events related to the specific node.

Additionally, if there are any tickets configured (requires the use of
geo clustering via booth footnote:[https://github.com/ClusterLabs/booth/]),
these are also displayed in the status view  and can be managed in a
similar fashion to resources.

=== Multi-cluster Dashboard

The Dashboard can be used to monitor the local cluster, displaying a
blinkenlights-style overview of all resources as well as any recent
failures that may have occurred. It is also possible to configure
access to remote clusters, so that multiple clusters can be monitored
from a single interface. This can be useful as a HUD in an operations
center, or when using geo clustering.

Hawk can also run in an *offline mode*, where you run Hawk on a
non-cluster machine which monitors one or more remote clusters.

=== History Explorer

The history explorer is a tool for collecting and downloading cluster
reports, which include logs and other information for a certain
timeframe. The history explorer is also useful for analysing such
cluster reports. You can either upload a previously generated cluster
report for analysis, or generate one on the fly.

Once uploaded, you can scroll through all of the cluster events that
took place in the time frame covered by the report. For each event,
you can see the current cluster configuration, logs from all cluster
nodes and a transition graph showing exactly what happened and why.

=== Configuration

Hawk makes it easy to configure both resources, groups of resources,
constraints and tags. You can also configure resource templates to be
reused later, and cloned resources that are active on multiple nodes
at once.

=== Wizards

Cluster wizards are useful for creating more complicated
configurations in a single process. The wizards vary in complexity
from simply configuring a single virtual IP address to configuring
multiple resources together with constraints, in multiple steps and
including package installation, configuration and setup.

=== View Configuration and Graph

From the web interface you can view the current cluster configuration
in the `crm` shell syntax or as XML. You can also generate a graph
view of the resources and constraints configured in the cluster.

=== Command Log

To make the transition between using the web interface and the command
line interface easier, Hawk provides a command log showing a list of
recent commands executed by the web interface. A user who is learning
to configure a Pacemaker cluster can start by using the web interface,
and learn how to use the command line in the process.

=== Access Control Lists

Pacemaker supports fine-grained access control to the configuration
based on user roles. These roles can be viewed and configured directly
from the web interface. Using the ACL rules, you can for example
create unprivileged user accounts that are able to log in and view the
state of the cluster, but cannot edit resources.

=== Simulator

Hawk features a cluster simulation mode. Once enabled, any changes to
the cluster are not applied directly. Instead, events such as resource
failure or node failure can be simulated, and the user can see what
the resulting cluster response would be. This can be very useful when
configuring constraints, to ensure that the rules work as intended.

== Installation ==

Hawk is a Ruby on Rails app which runs using the Puma web server
(http://puma.io/).

There is a special build mode which vendors all the rubygems used by
Hawk, to create a package which bundles all of the gems. See the
included RPM spec file in +rpm/hawk.spec+ for details.

For details on the rubygems used by hawk, see the gemfile in
+hawk/Gemfile+.

== Build Dependencies ==

The exact versions specified here may not be accurate. Also, note that
Hawk also requires the rubygems listed in +hawk/Gemfile+.

* ruby version 1.9.3 or higher
* libpacemaker-devel
* pacemaker-libs-devel
* glib2-devel
* libxml2-devel >= 2.6.21
* libxslt-devel
* openssl-devel
* pam-devel


=== Dependencies ===

The exact versions specified here may not be accurate. Also, note that
Hawk also requires the rubygems listed in +hawk/Gemfile+.

* crmsh
* graphviz
* graphviz-gd
* dejavu
* pacemaker >= 1.1.8
* iproute2


Some dependencies may differ depending on the distribution:

* rubypick (Fedora)

=== Installing The Easy Way ===

Hawk is included with SLE HA 11 SP1, openSUSE 11.4, and later
SUSE releases. Recent versions are also available
http://software.opensuse.org/download?project=network:ha-clustering:Factory&package=hawk2[for download from OBS].

Just install the RPM, then run:

--------------------------------------
# systemctl enable hawk
# systemctl start hawk
--------------------------------------

=== Installing The Other Easy Way ===

If you have a SUSE- or Fedora-based system, you can build
an RPM easily from the source tree.  Just clone this git repo,
and run "make rpm".

Once built, install the RPM on your cluster nodes and:

--------------------------------------
# systemctl enable hawk
# systemctl start hawk
--------------------------------------

=== Installing The Hard Way ===

If the above RPM build doesn't work for you, you can build and install
straight from the source tree, but _read the Makefile first_ to ensure
you'll be happy with the outcome!

--------------------------------------
# make
# sudo make install
--------------------------------------

The above will install in +/srv/www/hawk+. To install somewhere else
(e.g.: +/var/www/hawk+) and/or to use a Red Hat-style init script,
try:

--------------------------------------
# make WWW_BASE=/var/www INIT_STYLE=redhat
--------------------------------------
--------------------------------------
# sudo make WWW_BASE=/var/www INIT_STYLE=redhat install
--------------------------------------

=== Installing The Other Hard Way ===

Grab the SRPM from OBS, for example try the one in
http://download.opensuse.org/repositories/network:/ha-clustering:/Stable/Fedora_19/src/
if you're using Fedora 19, and build that.


== A Note on SSL Certificates ==

The Hawk init script will automatically generate a self-signed SSL
certificate, in +/etc/hawk/hawk.pem+.  If you want
to use your own certificate, replace +hawk.key+ and +hawk.pem+ with
your certificate.


== Hacking Hawk ==

=== Vagrant

To hack on Hawk we recommend to use the vagrant setup. There is a
Vagrantfile attached, which creates a three-node cluster with a basic
configuration suitable for development and testing.

To be prepared for getting our vagrant setup running you need to follow
some steps.

* Install the vagrant package from http://www.vagrantup.com/downloads.html,
  the minimal version requirement is +>= 1.7.0+ in order to work properly
  with openSUSE/SLED workstation setups.

* Install +virtualbox+, we assume you know how to do that on your OS. If
  you prefer +libvirt+ you can use that as well.

Out of the box, +vagrant+ is configured to synchronize the working
folder to +/vagrant+ in the virtual machines using NFS. For this to
work properly, the +vagrant-bindfs+ plugin is necessary.

Install it using the following command:

--------------------------------------
  # vagrant plugin install vagrant-bindfs
--------------------------------------

* If you plan to use +libvirt+ as provider make sure you have the 
  libvirt-plugin installed:

--------------------------------------
  # vagrant plugin install vagrant-libvirt
--------------------------------------

* You need to fetch the git submodules to finish your development setup:

--------------------------------------
  # git submodule update --init --recursive
--------------------------------------

This is all you need to prepare initally to set up the vagrant environment,
now you can simply start the virtual machine with +vagrant up+ and start
an ssh session with +vagrant ssh webui+ based on +virtualbox+. To start the
virtual machines on +libvirt+ you have to append +--provider=libvirt+ to the
above commands, e.g. +vagrant up --provider=libvirt+. If you want to access
the source within the virtual machine you have to switch to the +/vagrant+
directory.

=== Web server instances

You can access the Hawk web interface based on the git source through
+http://localhost:3000+ now. If you want to access the version installed
through packages you can reach it through +https://localhost:7630+.

=== Managing the application instances

Installed on the development VM is a script called +hawk+, which can be used
to control the development instance of hawk.

--------------------------------------
$ vagrant ssh webui
vagrant@webui:~> hawk status
vagrant@webui:~> hawk log
vagrant@webui:~> hawk start
vagrant@webui:~> hawk stop
vagrant@webui:~> hawk restart
--------------------------------------

Because Hawk is multi-threaded, the Rails asset auto-loading doesn't work properly.
Unfortunately this means that you need to run +hawk restart+ after changing
most files. The exception is the HAML view files which update automatically.

If the development hawk instance isn't running, it can be started using this command:

--------------------------------------
webui:/vagrant/hawk # sudo -u vagrant bin/rails s
--------------------------------------

=== Hacking hawk's tools

If you need to change something on +hawk_chkpwd+, +hawk_invoke+ or
+hawk_monitor+ you need to provision the machine again with the command
+vagrant provision+ to get this scripts compiled and copied to the correct
places, setuid-root and group to haclient in /usr/bin again. You should
end up with something like:

--------------------------------------
# ls /usr/sbin/hawk_* -l+ +
-rwsr-x--- 1 root haclient 9884 2011-04-14 22:56 /usr/sbin/hawk_chkpwd+
-rwsr-x--- 1 root haclient 9928 2011-04-14 22:56 /usr/sbin/hawk_invoke+
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root     9992 2011-04-14 22:56 /usr/sbin/hawk_monitor+
--------------------------------------

+hawk_chkpwd+ is almost identical to +unix2_chkpwd+, except it restricts
acccess to users in the +haclient+ group, and doesn't inject any delay
when invoked by the +hacluster+ user (which is the user the Hawk web
server instance runs as).

+hawk_invoke+ allows the +hacluster+ user to run a small assortment
of Pacemaker CLI tools as another user in order to support Pacemaker's
ACL feature.  It is used by Hawk when performing various management
tasks.

+hawk_monitor+ is not installed setuid-root.  It exists to be polled
by the web browser, to facilitate near-realtime updates of the cluster
status display.  It is not used when running Hawk via WEBrick.


== Questions, Feedback, etc. ==

Hawk is developed at github, please file any issues or submit patches
via the github interface at https://github.com/ClusterLabs/hawk/issues .

Please direct comments, feedback, questions etc. to the Pacemaker
mailing list at http://clusterlabs.org/mailman/listinfo/users .
